v5.0.0
======

✨ Added
--------

GUI
~~~~
* Added Graphical interface (``PySide6``). Launches when no arguments given.
* ``ConverterTab``: drag & drop, file type filters, output structure options.
* ``MapCacheTab``: ``.mdat`` to ``.mca`` conversion with threading.
* ``VersionWidget``: update check popup with GitHub release lookup.

CLI
~~~
* **New command structure:** ``scfile convert`` and ``scfile mapcache``.
* ``scfile.__main__``: automatically runs ``convert`` when a file or directory is given as first argument.
* ``--updates`` flag for version check.
* ``--on-conflict`` (``overwrite``/``rename``/``skip``).
* ``params`` module with click types: ``Files``, ``Output``, ``MapCacheDir``, ``Formats``, ``OnConflict``.

Formats
~~~~~~~
* ``EfkmodelDecoder``: new source format ``.efkmodel`` (geometry only).
* ``McalDecoder``: new source format ``.mcal`` (animation library, no export).
* ``MdatDecoder``: new source format ``.mdat`` (world regions).
* ``McaEncoder``: new output format ``.mca`` (anvil regions).
* ``FbxEncoder``: new output format ``.fbx`` (geometry only).
* NBT encoding utilities in ``nbt.nbt`` (``encode``, ``compound``, ``list``, etc.).
* Block ID mapping table for Anvil format in ``mca.mapping``.

Core
~~~~
* ``StructIO``: single class (replaces ``StructBytesIO``/``StructFileIO``).
* ``BaseFile``: unified binary stream adapter (supports path, bytes, IO).
* ``FileDecoder.prelude()`` hook (replaces ``prepare``).
* ``FileDecoder.convert_to`` now accepts ``output`` parameter (``IOStream``).
* ``FileEncoder.transform()`` hook and transforms pipeline.
* ``RegionContent`` container for world chunks.
* ``TexarrContent`` (renamed from ``TextureArrayContent``).
* ``RegionChunk``, ``ChunkHeader`` structures.
* ``ModelContent`` fields: ``uv2``, ``tangents``, ``colors``.

Models
~~~~~~
* ``transforms`` module: scene transformation functions.
* ``ModelMesh`` fields: ``uv2``, ``tangents``, ``colors``, ``link_space``, ``uv_origin``, ``uv_sign``, ``max_influences``.
* ``ModelSkeleton`` fields: ``space``, ``hierarchy``.
* ``AnimationClip``: replaced ``transforms`` with ``rotations`` and ``translations``.
* ``SkeletonBone`` property ``slug``.
* **New Enums:** ``UVOrigin``, ``UVSign``, ``LinkSpace``, ``SkeletonSpace``, ``SkeletonHierarchy``, ``AnimationTranslation``, ``AnimationRotation``.
* **New Type Aliases:** ``EulerAngles``, ``TransformMatrix``, ``BindPose``, etc.

Convert
~~~~~~~
* Converter registry: ``converters()`` and ``registry()`` functions; ``@converter`` decorator registers format pairs.

Utils
~~~~~
* New package ``scfile.utils``.
* ``files``: ``resource()``, ``resolve()``, ``walk()``, ``destination()``.
* ``versions``: ``Version`` dataclass with parsing and comparison.
* ``updates``: update checking against GitHub API.
* ``cli``: callbacks ``version_callback``, ``updates_callback``.


📝 Changed
----------

Core
~~~~
* ``UserOptions`` renamed to ``Options``.
* ``UserOptions.parse_skeleton`` → ``Options.skeleton``.
* ``UserOptions.parse_animation`` → ``Options.animation``.
* ``UserOptions.overwrite`` replaced by ``Options.on_conflict``.
* ``FileDecoder.prepare()`` renamed to ``prelude()``.
* ``FileEncoder.save_as()``, ``export_as()`` now return ``Self``.

CLI
~~~
* ``scfile`` command moved to ``scfile.cli.cmd`` with ``click.group``.
* Version callback moved to ``scfile.utils.cli``.
* ``--unique`` flag replaced by ``--on-conflict rename``.

Formats
~~~~~~~
* **Model Decoders**: syntactic sugar ``to_XXX()`` replaced by ``as_XXX()``. Now they return empty encoder, ``encode()`` must be called explicitly.
* **Model Decoders**: replaced ``prepare()`` with transforms list.
* ``GlbEncoder._add_meshes`` now writes ``uv2`` and ``tangents`` when present.
* ``DaeEncoder._add_controller_sources`` now checks ``max_influences > 0``.
* ``McsaFileIO._links`` normalizes bone weights.

Consts
~~~~~~
* ``NBT_FILENAMES`` renamed to ``SUPPORTED_NBT``.

Tests
~~~~~
* Coverage except ``scfile.gui`` now 100%.


🐛 Fixed
--------

* ``McsaDecoder``: UV2 and Tangents parsing (export only in ``.glb``).
* ``GlbEncoder``: binary data on meshes without skinning links when skeleton present.


🗑️ Removed
----------

* CLI Flag ``--unique``.
* ``FileFormat.ITEMNAMES`` (uses ``NBT``).
* ``McsaBoneLinksError`` (silent fallback).
* ``scfile.cli.commands.py``, ``scfile.cli.types.py``, ``scfile.cli.utils.py``.
* ``SceneCounts``, ``MeshCounts``.
* ``structures.types``.
* ``enums.FileMode``.


♻️ Refactored
--------------

Structure
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
* Moved ``core.io`` package to ``core.structio``.
* Moved ``core.context`` package to ``core.content`` and ``core.options``.
* Moved ``animation``, ``mesh``, ``skeleton``, ``scene``, ``flags``, ``vectors`` into ``structures.models``.
* Moved ``consts.McsaUnits`` into ``formats.mcsa.consts``.
* Moved ``consts.OlString`` into ``formats.ol.io``.
* Merged ``StructBytesIO`` and ``StructFileIO`` into single ``StructIO`` class.
* Split ``AnimationClip.transforms`` into ``rotations`` and ``translations``.
* Removed ``convert.legacy`` (merged back into ``convert.formats``).

Rename
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
* ``ModelMesh.positions`` → ``vertices``.
* ``ModelMesh.textures`` → ``uv1``.
* ``TextureArrayContent`` → ``TexarrContent``.
* ``TextureArrayDecoder`` → ``TexarrDecoder``.
* ``TextureArrayEncoder`` → ``TexarrEncoder``.
* ``NbtBytesIO`` → ``NbtBufferIO``.
* ``McsaModel`` → ``ModelDefaults``.
* ``MeshOrigin`` → ``MeshBounds``.
